# ML_Breast_Treatment
Classification Algorithm to direct breast patients towards FB or DIBH treatment using CT scan

Recent years have shown rapid development in the application of machine learning (ML) in all areas of science. In medical physics, the ever-increasing number of diagnostic and planning images gives ML the potential to dramatically improve radiation therapy for cancer treatment. Since every cancer case is unique, the nature of cancer treatment can be complex and requires physicians to consider multiple variables and several treatment strategies. Choosing the best treatment comes down to maximizing the removal of cancer while minimizing the risk of side effects – optimizing the patient’s quality of life. ML can provide a support tool for physicians by replicating this high-level decision-making process using anatomical data from a historical database. An area that would greatly benefit from ML is external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) for breast cancer as many steps in the treatment planning process are time-consuming and postpone treatment. 

Although EBRT offers a significant improvement in disease-free survival for individuals with regional breast cancer, there is still room for optimization as the incidence rate of lung pneumonitis remains approximately 1-5%. ML offers a solution that anticipates and identifies RSBC patients at risk of lung pneumonitis based on their anatomy and improves the efficiency and quality of treatment. Introducing automation to the current workflow will expedite treatment, saving time for the patient and the hospital staff while improving the quality of care. Additionally, the development of a ML framework that predicts optimal treatment has the potential to affect EBRT in clinics looking to invest resources and equipment in DIBH treatment. Although this framework is set in the context of one specific clinical scenario, the methodology is applicable to many interdisciplinary situations where automated classification of data will improve routines.  

Primary work has been dedicated to the development of a supervised classification ML framework that detects clinically measurable anatomical characteristics to indicate ideal treatment on a patient-by-patient basis. The long-term goal of this project is to develop a complete ML framework that integrates into the treatment planning software to provide decision support. Using novel ML techniques such as probabilistic classifiers, transfer learning, and deep learning we intend to optimize the treatment workflow – selecting the outcome that maximizes effective treatment yet minimizes effects such as lung pneumonitis.
